Title: Joe_Biden_2024_presidential_campaign
Joe Biden, the incumbent 46th president of the United States, announced his candidacy for re-election for a second and final term as president on April 25, 2023, with Vice President Kamala Harris as his running mate. If reelected he would be the oldest president inaugurated (on January 20, 2025), breaking his own (January 20, 2021) record.In May 2021, Biden's chief of staff Ron Klain indicated the Biden administration was "anticipating a bruising general election matchup" against Donald Trump, who had served as the 45th president of the United States and had been defeated by Biden in the 2020 presidential election, if the latter followed through on a bid to return to the presidency. In November 2021, against a backdrop of declining approval ratings, the Biden White House reiterated Biden's intent to run for reelection. In a March 2022 press conference, when asked about the possibility that Trump could be his opponent in 2024, Biden replied, "I'd be very fortunate if I had that same man running against me".

Background
This is Biden's fourth presidential campaign, and his first as an incumbent. His first campaign was in the 1988 Democratic Party presidential primaries, where he was initially considered one of the strongest candidates. Then a scandal broke when newspapers revealed plagiarism by Biden in law school records and in speeches, which led to his withdrawal from the race in September 1987.He made a second attempt during the 2008 Democratic Party presidential primaries, where he focused on his plan to achieve political success in the Iraq War through a system of federalization. Like his first presidential bid, Biden failed to garner a sufficient level of endorsements and support. He withdrew from the race after his poor performance in the Iowa caucus on January 3, 2008. He was eventually chosen by Barack Obama as his running mate and won the general election, being sworn in as vice president of the United States on January 20, 2009. He was Obama's running mate in 2012 and was re-elected vice president, being sworn in for second term on January 20, 2013, and serving until January 20, 2017.
Biden's third presidential bid came during the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries where he focused his plans as the candidate with the best chance of defeating then-president Donald Trump in the general election. Politico reported in 2018 that Biden had rejected a proposition to commit to serving only one term as president.In a PBS NewsHour/NPR/Marist poll released on April 25, 2023 - the day Biden announced his reelection campaign - his approval rating was just 41%, with a disapproval rating of 50%. A CBS News poll released the same day also found Biden's approval rating to be 41%; found that Harris's approval rating was 43%; found that 72% of respondents believed things in the U.S. were "out of control"; and found that 71% of respondents who said so, including 33% of Democrats, believed Biden was a primary cause. Several polls both before and after Biden's campaign announcement have shown that most Democrats want the party to nominate someone other than Biden for president in the 2024 election.

Campaign
Announcement
On April 25, 2023, Biden announced he was running for re-election. It was also announced that Julie Chávez Rodriguez would serve as campaign manager and Quentin Fulks would be principal deputy campaign manager. Lisa Blunt Rochester, Jim Clyburn, Chris Coons, Tammy Duckworth, Jeffrey Katzenberg, and Gretchen Whitmer were named national campaign co-chairs. Biden's campaign was launched four years to the day after the start of his 2020 presidential campaign. Politico reported that: "Biden is considering Michael Tyler (the longtime Democratic operative) for the role of communications director in his 2024 campaign". The launch date of his 2024 re-election campaign also marks the fourth anniversary of his initial 2020 presidential campaign.Biden formally kicked off his reelection campaign on June 17, 2023, at a union rally in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Social media activity
The Biden campaign created an account on Truth Social in October 2023. They announced on the social media platform X (formerly Twitter) that they had created the account on Truth Social because they found the idea "very funny". Numerous observers characterised this as an exercise by the Biden campaign in trolling Donald Trump.

National advisory board
The Biden-Harris 2024 national advisory board consists of:

Endorsements
Primary election polling
Polling with declared candidates
Hypothetical polling
General election polling
Hypothetical polling
See also
Joe Biden 2020 presidential campaign
Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign

Notes
References
External links

Official website
