Title: Kendrick_Lamar_discography#Studio_albums
American rapper Kendrick Lamar has released five studio albums, one compilation album, one extended play (EP), five mixtapes, 65 singles (including 44 as a featured artist), and three promotional singles. Lamar initially performed under the stage name K.Dot, releasing three mixtapes under that moniker: Y.H.N.I.C. (Hub City Threat: Minor of the Year) (2004), Training Day (2005), and C4 (2009). He gained major attention after the release of his fourth mixtape Overly Dedicated, which was released in 2010. It was Lamar's first full-length project to be released under his birth name and fared well enough to enter the United States Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, where it peaked at number 72.Lamar's debut studio album Section.80, was released on July 2, 2011, and issued on independent record label Top Dawg Entertainment (TDE). It peaked at number 113 on the US Billboard 200 chart. The album's lead single, "HiiiPoWeR", was released prior to the album through iTunes. In mid-2012, Lamar began promoting his second studio album and major label debut, Good Kid, M.A.A.D City. The album's first single, "The Recipe", peaked at number 38 on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. "Swimming Pools (Drank)", the album's lead single, peaked at number 17 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and became his first top 20 hit on the chart. Good Kid, M.A.A.D City was released in October 2012, through TDE, Aftermath Entertainment and Interscope Records. The album received universal critical acclaim and reached number two on the Billboard 200.On March 16, 2015, Lamar released his third studio album, To Pimp a Butterfly. The album was preceded by two singles, "I" and "The Blacker the Berry", which charted at numbers 39 and 66 on the US Billboard Hot 100, respectively. To Pimp a Butterfly received universal critical acclaim upon release, much like its predecessor, and had global charting success, debuting at number one on the overall albums charts in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom, as well as topping the US Billboard 200. On March 4, 2016, Lamar released Untitled Unmastered, a compilation album containing previously unreleased demos that originated during the recording of To Pimp a Butterfly. The compilation album gave Lamar his second chart-topping set in less than a year. On April 14, 2017, his fourth studio album, Damn, was released and reached number one on the Billboard 200, and has since been certified 3× Platinum. The album spawned the singles "Humble", "Loyalty" and "Love", which all reached the top 15 of the US Billboard Hot 100, with "Humble" becoming his first number-one single in the United States as a lead artist. Lamar's fifth studio album Mr. Morale & the Big Steppers was released on May 13, 2022, as his final project under TDE.

Albums
Studio albums
Compilation albums
Soundtrack albums
Mixtapes
EPs
Singles
As lead artist
As featured artist
Promotional singles
Other charted and certified songs
Other guest appearances
Additional songwriting credits
Production discography
2016
Kendrick Lamar – Untitled Unmastered

4. "Untitled 04 | 08.14.2014." (produced with Thundercat and Sounwave)

2018
Kendrick Lamar and various artists – Black Panther: The Album

1. "Black Panther" (produced with Sounwave and Cubeatz)
4. "The Ways" (performed by Khalid and Swae Lee) (produced with Sounwave and BadBadNotGood)
6. "I Am" (performed by Jorja Smith) (produced with Sounwave)
8. "Bloody Waters" (performed by Ab-Soul, Anderson .Paak and James Blake) (produced with Sounwave and Robin Hannibal)
10. "Redemption Interlude" (performed by Zacari) (produced with Baby Keem)
12. "Seasons" (performed by Mozzy, Sjava and Reason) (produced with Sounwave and Frank Dukes)

2022
Kendrick Lamar – Mr. Morale & the Big Steppers

1. "United in Grief" (produced with Sounwave, J. Lbs, Duval Timothy, Beach Noise and Tim Maxey)
10. "Count Me Out" (produced with Sounwave, DJ Dahi, J. Lbs and Tim Maxey)
13. "Savior (Interlude)" (produced with Sounwave and J. Lbs)
14. "Savior" (with Baby Keem and Sam Dew) (produced with Cardo, J. Lbs, Sounwave, Mario Luciano and Rascal)

See also
List of songs recorded by Kendrick Lamar
Black Hippy discography
List of awards and nominations received by Kendrick Lamar

Notes
References
External links
Official website
Kendrick Lamar at AllMusic
Kendrick Lamar discography at Discogs
Kendrick Lamar discography at MusicBrainz
