Title: Legality_of_cannabis_by_U.S._jurisdiction
In the United States, the use and possession of cannabis is illegal under federal law by way of the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. Cannabis is classified as a Schedule I drug under the Controlled Substances Act, determined to have a high potential for abuse and no accepted medical use, prohibiting its use for any purpose. Despite this, most states have passed laws to legalize the use of cannabis for medical purposes, while close to a majority of states have legalized for recreational use.
The medical use of cannabis is legal with a medical recommendation in 38 states, four out of five permanently inhabited U.S. territories, and the federal District of Columbia (D.C.). Ten other states have laws that limit the psychoactive compound tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), for the purpose of allowing access to products rich in cannabidiol (CBD). The Rohrabacher–Farr amendment, first passed in 2014, prohibits federal prosecution of individuals complying with state medical cannabis laws.The recreational use of cannabis has been legalized in 24 states, three U.S. territories, and D.C. Another seven states have decriminalized its use. Commercial distribution has been legalized in all jurisdictions where possession has been legalized, except for Virginia and D.C. Personal cultivation for recreational use is allowed in all of these jurisdictions except for Delaware, Illinois, New Jersey, and Washington state.
Some cannabis-derived compounds have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for prescription use. Cannabinoid drugs which have received FDA approval are Marinol (THC), Syndros (THC), Cesamet (nabilone), and Epidiolex (CBD). For non-prescription use, CBD, delta-8 THC, and other naturally-occurring cannabinoids derived from industrial hemp are legal and unregulated at the federal level, but legality and enforcement varies by state.

By state
Federal district
By inhabited territory
By tribal nation
Note: There are approximately 326 federally recognized Indian reservations in the United States. This table shows only reservations which are known to have legalized medical or recreational use of cannabis, and may not be a complete list of reservations that have done so.

Legalization timeline
See also
Cannabis and border towns in the United States
Cannabis laws of Canada by province or territory
Legal history of cannabis in the United States
Legality of cannabis
List of United States cannabis regulatory agencies
Solomon–Lautenberg amendment ("Smoke a joint, lose your license" laws)
Timeline of cannabis laws in the United States

Notes
References
External links
State marijuana laws (NORML)
State medical marijuana laws (NCSL)
State recreational marijuana laws (ProCon.org)
State industrial hemp laws (NCSL)
