Title: List_of_Spotify_streaming_records#Most_streamed_albums_in_a_single_day
The following lists contain the most-streamed songs and albums as well as charts records on the audio streaming platform Spotify.
As of December 2023, "Blinding Lights" (2019) by Canadian singer the Weeknd is the most-streamed song of all time on Spotify, while "Dance Monkey" (2019) by Australian singer-songwriter Tones and I is the most-streamed song by a female artist. English-Albanian singer Dua Lipa has the most songs in the top 100 for a female artist with five entries. The oldest song in the top 100 is Queen's "Bohemian Rhapsody" (1975).
There are nine songs known to have claimed the top ranking, starting with "Viva la Vida" by British rock band Coldplay in 2008. Spotify's most-streamed song for the longest period of time was "Shape of You" (2017) by English singer-songwriter Ed Sheeran.
As of December 2023, over 500 songs have surpassed one billion streams on Spotify, 50 have surpassed two billion, and four have surpassed three billion in the platform's history.

Most-streamed songs
On this chart, songs are ranked by cumulative streams since their release.

Top artists
Historical most-streamed songs
Milestones and achievements for songs
Weekly number-one songs
Annual top five most-streamed songs
The following table lists the five songs that Spotify reported as most-played in each calendar year.

The following table lists the top song that Spotify reported as most-played in each calendar year, for the years 2008 to 2011.

Most-streamed songs in a single day
The following table lists the 20 songs to get the most streams in a single day, as registered on Spotify Global Daily chart.

Most-streamed songs in a single week
The following table lists the top 20 most-streamed in a single week, as registered on the Spotify Global Weekly chart.

Longest-running number-one songs by days
The following table lists the songs with more than 60 days in the number 1 position on the Global Spotify Chart.

10 most-streamed albums
As of November 2023, Un Verano Sin Ti by Puerto Rican rapper Bad Bunny is the most-streamed album of all time on Spotify, while Dua Lipa by English-Albanian singer Dua Lipa is the most-streamed album by a female artist.
The following table lists the top 10 most-streamed albums on Spotify, with streams rounded to the nearest million, as well as the number of tracks, the artist and the date it was released.

Milestones and achievements for albums
Annual top five most-streamed albums
The following table lists the five albums that Spotify reported as most-played in each calendar year.

Most streamed albums in a single day
The following table lists the most streamed albums in a single day, registering the total of obtained streams, the artist, the publication of the album and the date in which these streams were reached.

Most streamed albums in a single week
The following table lists the most streamed albums in a single week, registering the total of obtained streams, the artist, the publication of the album and the date in which these streams were reached.

See also
Notes
References

Spotify xManager
