Title: List_of_Super_Bowl_broadcasters
The following is a list of Super Bowl broadcasters, that is, all of the national American television and radio networks and sports announcers that have broadcast the first four AFL-NFL World Championship Games and thereafter the championship games of the National Football League. It does not include any announcers who may have appeared on local radio broadcasts produced by the participating teams' flagship stations.
Super Bowl I is the only Super Bowl to have been broadcast in the U.S. by two different broadcasters simultaneously. At the time, NBC held the rights to nationally televise AFL games while CBS had the rights to broadcast NFL games. Both networks were allowed to cover the game, and each network used its own announcers, but NBC was only allowed to use the CBS feed instead of producing its own. Beginning with Super Bowl II, NBC televised the game in even years and CBS in odd years. This annual rotation between the two networks continued through the 1970 AFL–NFL merger when NBC was given the rights to televise AFC games and CBS winning the rights to broadcast NFC games. Although ABC began broadcasting Monday Night Football in 1970, it was not added to the Super Bowl rotation until Super Bowl XIX, played in January 1985. ABC, CBS and NBC then continued to rotate the Super Bowl until 1994, when Fox replaced CBS as the NFC broadcaster. CBS then took NBC's place in the rotation after the former replaced the later as the AFC broadcaster in 1998. As a result of new contracts signed in 2006, with NBC taking over Sunday Night Football from ESPN, and Monday Night Football moving from ABC to ESPN, NBC took ABC's place in the Super Bowl rotation. The rotation between CBS, Fox, and NBC will continue until the new contracts that will take effect starting in 2024, allowing ABC to return and starting a four-network rotation.The four-year rotation beginning with Super Bowl LVIII also allows each broadcaster to offer simulcasts or alternative broadcasts on its sister networks and platforms. CBS's sister network Nickelodeon is planning to air an alternate children-oriented telecast of Super Bowl LVIII. And ABC's rights include ESPN simulcasts and alternative broadcasts on other ESPN networks.The NFL has broken the traditional broadcasting rotation at least twice. NBC originally had broadcasting rights for Super Bowl XXVI and CBS for Super Bowl XXVII, but the NFL allowed the networks to switch the two games in order to allow CBS a significant lead-in to its coverage of the 1992 Winter Olympics. Likewise, NBC was to air Super Bowl LV and CBS for Super Bowl LVI, but the two networks agreed to swap the broadcasting rights. Therefore, CBS benefitted from holding rights to the Super Bowl and the 2021 NCAA final Four, and NBC was allowed to pair its Super Bowl coverage with the 2022 Winter Olympics. Under the four-network rotation that will take effect in 2024, the league awarded NBC the Super Bowl during Winter Olympic years.CBS has televised the most Super Bowl games, with Super Bowl LV as its 21st and will broadcast its 22nd with Super Bowl LVIII in February 2024.

Television
English language
Notes
^Note 1 : Super Bowl I was simulcast on both CBS (at the time the sole NFL network) and NBC (the AFL network). From Super Bowl II onward, the networks began rotating exclusive coverage of the game on an annual basis. Super Bowls I–VI were blacked out in the television markets of the host cities, due to league restrictions then in place.^Note 2 : The 1989 television contract (which was in effect) gave CBS Super Bowl XXVI instead of Super Bowl XXVII, which was in their rotation. The NFL swapped the CBS and NBC years in an effort to give CBS enough lead-in programming for the upcoming 1992 Winter Olympics two weeks later.^Note 3 : The television contract for 1990–1993 had each network having one Super Bowl telecast of the first three games as part of the package. The fourth Super Bowl (XXVIII) was up for a separate sealed bid. NBC won the bid, and since they were last in the rotation for Super Bowl coverage in the regular contract, ended up with two straight Super Bowls. CBS is the only other network to televise two Super Bowls (I and II) in a row. It is also of note that Super Bowls XXVII and XXVIII are the first (and to date, only) back-to-back Super Bowls to feature the same two teams (Dallas Cowboys and Buffalo Bills).^Note 4 : Michael Strahan was a last-minute substitute for the Vince Lombardi Trophy presentation ceremony, as Terry Bradshaw (who has normally covered the Lombardi Trophy presentation ceremonies for Super Bowls airing on Fox) left the New Jersey/New York area the day before Super Bowl XLVIII to fly home due to the death of his father.^Note 5 : Under the 2013 television contract, Super Bowl LV was originally assigned to NBC, while Super Bowl LVI was originally assigned to CBS. In March 2019, CBS agreed to trade Super Bowl LVI to NBC in exchange for Super Bowl LV so that the former would not have to compete against the 2022 Winter Olympics.^Note 6 : CBS's sister network Nickelodeon is planning to air an alternate children-oriented telecast of Super Bowl LVIII. This would mark the first time that an alternative broadcast of the game will air on the broadcaster's sister network.

See also
The NFL Today
Fox NFL Sunday
The NFL on NBC pregame show
Football Night in America

Spanish language
Radio
References
External links
Tom Hoffarth of the Los Angeles Daily News breaks down the Super Bowl by play-by-play announcer.
Only 11 have called TV's biggest game - Times Union
The best and worst analysts in the booth
Pat Summerall and John Madden top list of greatest broadcast booths in Super Bowl history - NY Daily News
SUPER BOWL BROADCASTERS HISTORY (1967-2013)
Ranking the best and worst Super Bowl announcers, from John Madden to Phil Simms
Ranking every Super Bowl broadcast announcer
The best of the best; ranking all-time top Super Bowl play-by-play voices; From Al Michaels to Ray Scott
