Title: List_of_highest-grossing_Indian_films#Global_gross_figures
This is a ranking of the highest grossing Indian films which includes films from various languages based on the conservative global box office estimates as reported by reputable sources. There is no official tracking of domestic box office figures within India, and Indian sites publishing data are frequently pressured to increase their domestic box office estimates.Indian films have been screened in markets around the world since the early 20th century. As of 2003, there are markets in over 90 countries where films from India are screened. During the first decade of the 21st century, there was a steady rise in the ticket price, a tripling in the number of theatres and an increase in the number of prints of a film being released, which led to a large increase in the box office collections.The majority of highest-grossing Indian films are Hindi films. As of 2014, Hindi cinema represents 43% of the net box office revenue in India, while Telugu and Tamil cinema represent 36%, and other industries constitute 21%. In 2019, the Hindi film industry represented 44% of box office revenue, followed by the Telugu and the Tamil film industries, each representing 13%. Other prominent languages in the Indian film industry include Malayalam and Kannada, representing 5% each, as well as Bengali, Marathi, Odia, Punjabi, Gujarati and Bhojpuri. As of 2020, the combined revenue of all other language film industries has surpassed that of the Hindi film industry, By 2021, Telugu cinema became the largest film industry of India in terms of box-office.See List of highest-grossing films in India for domestic gross figures and List of highest-grossing Indian films in the overseas markets for overseas gross figures.

Highest-grossing films
The following table lists the top 50 highest-grossing Indian films worldwide, which includes films from all Indian languages. The figures are not adjusted for inflation.

Highest-grossing films by language
Bengali cinema was the center of Indian cinema in the 1930s, and accounted for a quarter of India's film output in the 1950s. Cinema in South India accounted for nearly half of India's cinema halls in the 1940s.

Assamese
Assamese cinema is based in the state of Assam and produces films in Assamese language.

Bengali
Bengali cinema, also known by the nickname Tollywood, a portmanteau of the words Tollygunge and Hollywood, is the Bengali language film industry centered in the Tollygunge neighbourhood of Kolkata, West Bengal.

Bhojpuri
The Bhojpuri cinema produces films in the Bhojpuri language.

Gujarati
The Gujarati cinema produces films in Gujarati language and is primarily focused on the audience in Gujarat and Mumbai. The film industry is sometimes referred to as Dhollywood or Gollywood.

Hindi
The Hindi language film industry, based in Mumbai, India, is frequently known as Bollywood. Bollywood is one of the largest film producers in India and one of the largest centres of film production in the world.

Kannada
Bengaluru is the center for the Kannada cinema produced in the Kannada language. It is sometimes known by the nickname Sandalwood.

Malayalam
Malayalam cinema is a part of Indian cinema based in Kerala dedicated to the production of motion pictures in the Malayalam language. It is sometimes known by the nickname "Mollywood" by certain media outlets.

Marathi
The Marathi cinema industry produces films in the Marathi language and is based in the state of Maharashtra, India. India's first full-length film, Raja Harishchandra, was released in 1913 in Marathi.

Odia
Odia cinema is primarily based in Odisha state producing movies mainly in the Odia language and a few movies in Sambalpuri language. The first Odia movie was Sita Vivaha which was released in 1936.

Punjabi
Punjabi cinema, producing films in the Punjabi language, is primarily based in the state of Punjab, India.

Tamil
Tamil cinema, popularly known as Kollywood, is the filmmaking industry based in Chennai, Tamil Nadu. The films are made primarily in Tamil language.

Telugu
Telugu cinema, also known by its nickname "Tollywood," is a part of Indian cinema producing films in the Telugu-language, in the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana and is centered in the Hyderabad neighbourhood of Film Nagar.

High-grossing films by year
Highest-grossing franchises and film series
The Khiladi franchise was the first film franchise to gross over ₹100 crore, followed by the Krrish film series. Baahubali is the first franchise to collect over ₹1,000 crore at the box office, and the only franchise where all the films have grossed at least ₹500 crore worldwide.

See also
List of highest-grossing South Indian films
List of highest-grossing films in India
List of highest-grossing Indian films in the overseas markets
List of most expensive Indian films
100 Crore Club
1000 Crore Club
Lists of highest-grossing films

Notes


== References ==
