Title: Tornadoes_of_2023
This page documents notable tornadoes and tornado outbreaks worldwide in 2023. Strong and destructive tornadoes form most frequently in the United States, Argentina, Brazil, Bangladesh, and Eastern India, but can occur almost anywhere under the right conditions. Tornadoes also develop occasionally in southern Canada during the Northern Hemisphere's summer and somewhat regularly at other times of the year across Europe, Asia, Argentina, Australia and New Zealand. Tornadic events are often accompanied by other forms of severe weather, including thunderstorms, strong winds, and hail.
There have been 1,310 preliminary filtered reported tornadoes and 1,261 confirmed tornadoes in the United States in 2023. Worldwide, 115 tornado-related deaths have been confirmed, 82 of them in the United States, 12 in China, nine in Indonesia, eight in Myanmar, three in Turkey, and one in Saudi Arabia.
January saw the third-highest number of tornado watches and confirmed tornadoes of any January on record in the United States. Additionally, the first two months of the year saw the fourth-highest number of confirmed tornadoes for the first 59 days of any year on record. In addition, the year has been deadlier than average, with multiple fatal tornadoes. By April 5, 63 deaths from tornadoes had been recorded in the United States; this was almost three times higher than 2022's total of 23 deaths and approaching the annual average of roughly 70 deaths. Although below average tornadic activity occurred in May, active weather patterns consistently spawned damaging tornado outbreaks throughout the summer, causing 12 additional fatalities. However, tornadic activity decreased dramatically in September and was almost non-existent through a large portion of the autumn months. This was mostly due to most Atlantic tropical cyclones missing the United States during the peak  of hurricane season and few early-season frontal systems.
Notably this year, several organizations across Europe including the European Severe Storms Laboratory and Deutscher Wetterdienst published and began using the new International Fujita scale, starting in August 2023.

Events
United States yearly total
Note: One tornado has been officially confirmed but is not yet rated.

Canada yearly total
Note: One tornado has been confirmed but is unrated.

January
There were 128 confirmed tornadoes in the United States in the month of January.

January 2–4
In early January, a three-day severe weather outbreak brought damaging winds, large hail, and numerous tornadoes to the Southern United States and impacted the Midwestern United States to a lesser extent. On January 2, the Storm Prediction Center issued an enhanced risk for all of Arkansas and parts of surrounding states, with a 10% hatched risk for tornadoes. An EF1 tornado damaged homes and the high school in Jessieville, Arkansas, injuring two people. A large 1.1-mile-wide (1.8 km) EF2 tornado caused severe damage near Jonesboro, Louisiana, snapping many large trees, inflicting significant damage to several residences, and injuring three people. Another strong EF2 tornado knocked down metal truss electrical transmission towers near Haile and destroyed an outbuilding. A third large, long-tracked EF2 tornado damaged or destroyed multiple houses, vehicles, and a mobile home in Montrose, Arkansas, and snapped or uprooted countless trees and many power poles along its path. The next day, another enhanced risk was issued farther east in the Gulf Coast region, with a 10% hatched risk area for tornadoes in place for parts of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama. An EF2 tornado downed many large trees, tore most of the roof off a house, caused roof damage to other homes, and destroyed boathouses and outbuildings at the Jordan Lake Reservoir near Deatsville, Alabama. Several tornadoes touched down as far north as Illinois, including two separate EF0 and EF1 tornadoes that caused damage to outbuildings and farm equipment near Maroa. Another pair of EF1 and EF0 tornadoes also briefly touched down in Decatur, with the EF1 tornado damaging a vacant bowling alley and the EF0 tornado causing minor damage at Richland Community College. Tornadoes continued touching down into the morning of January 4, including a high-end EF1 tornado that damaged several homes, flipped cars, and severely injured a person on the eastern side of Montgomery, Alabama. In Georgia, an EF1 tornado struck the small community of Roosterville, where a barn and a mobile home were destroyed. An EF1 tornado also struck Sandersville, where homes and a warehouse were damaged and many trees were downed, some of which landed on structures. A semi-truck was overturned in Sandersville, injuring the driver. Additional weak tornadoes touched down across parts of the Carolinas later that day before the outbreak came to an end. 
Widespread flooding also occurred as a result of the storm system, with 8.55 in (217 mm) of rain in DeWitt, Arkansas, and 4.99 in (127 mm) of rain in Greenville, Kentucky. Cane Creek State Park recorded 7.30 in (185 mm) of rain, their largest 24-hour total on record. Daily rainfall records were also established in Memphis, Tennessee, and Jackson, Mississippi, with Amtrak's northbound City of New Orleans being delayed due to flooding and debris on the tracks between the two cities. Further north, Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport instituted a ground stop due to the snow and ice, in what became the 4th largest January snowstorm for the region. One fatality occurred due to the snowstorm as a result of a car crash in Clearwater Township, Minnesota. Overall, a total of 58 tornadoes were confirmed.

January 12
A significant tornado outbreak impacted the Southeastern United States, with several strong and long-tracked tornadoes touching down and causing multiple fatalities. On January 12, the SPC issued an enhanced risk of severe weather, including a 10% risk area for tornadoes. Multiple supercell thunderstorms formed in the threat area later that day, and significant tornadoes began touching down. In Alabama, the small towns of Emelle, Eutaw, and Movico were all impacted by EF2 tornadoes, resulting in extensive damage. A large high-end EF2 tornado also caused severe structural damage in Selma, Alabama. Many homes and businesses sustained major damage in Selma, and a daycare with 70 children plus workers was destroyed, but only one minor injury occurred inside, one of two injuries reported from the tornado. The same storm that produced the Selma tornado later produced a long-tracked EF3 tornado that prompted tornado emergencies for Autauga, Elmore, Chilton, Coosa, and northern Tallapoosa counties. This deadly tornado caused seven fatalities in the Old Kingston community of Autauga County as it completely obliterated numerous mobile homes, as well as tossing vehicles and causing massive timber damage. Multiple strong tornadoes, which were all spawned by the Selma supercell, also impacted parts of Georgia, including an EF2 tornado that inflicted major damage to homes and industrial buildings in the southern part of LaGrange. A large EF3 tornado struck the western edge of Griffin and Experiment, badly damaging or destroying homes and businesses, and flipping cars. This tornado was accompanied by three other tornadoes at the beginning of its track near Griffin, including a high-end EF2 tornado that caused considerable damage to homes and trees. Another high-end EF2 tornado also caused significant damage in Jenkinsburg and near Jackson Lake, resulting in one fatality when a tree fell onto a car along with an indirect fatality the next day when falling tree limb knocked a transportation worker out of a bucket truck while he working to restore power lines. A high-end EF1 tornado also touched down near the Atlanta suburb of Mableton, damaging an industrial business and downing many trees, some of which landed on homes. Other weak tornadoes were confirmed in parts of Mississippi, Tennessee, Kentucky, Illinois, and the Carolinas. Overall, this outbreak produced a total of 41 tornadoes and resulted in eight fatalities, along with at least 53 injuries.

January 17 (Italy)
On January 17, a brief but strong tornado struck Valmontone, which is a comune in the Metropolitan City of Rome Capital, causing significant damage and injuring 2 people. The tornado was spawned by an embedded "comma head" circulation and was captured by a surveillance camera. Multiple homes, apartment buildings, and other structures suffered severe roof damage, and the top floor of one residence was completely destroyed. Trees, gates, and fences were knocked down, and debris was strewn across yards and roads. The European Severe Storms Laboratory rated the tornado F2 on the Fujita scale, with a path length of 2.7 kilometres (1.7 mi) and a maximum width of 150 metres (160 yd). After the tornado, Valmontone declared a state of disaster.

January 22
A line of severe storms produced damaging straight-line winds and multiple tornadoes in the Florida Panhandle and Southeast Georgia throughout January 22, including two low-end EF2 tornadoes. The first one struck the community of Turquoise Beach, Florida, to the northeast of Santa Rosa Beach, downing trees and damaging several homes. Three of the houses that were damaged had significant portions of their roofs uplifted. The other strong tornado struck the northern side of Adel, Georgia, shifting multiple buildings off their foundations, including a metal structure that was completely destroyed. It also destroyed a motorhome, knocked over a series of centerline irrigation pivots, and damaged trees, some of which fell on homes. Three EF1 tornadoes also touched down elsewhere in Georgia that day, bringing the final tornado tally to five.

January 24–25
On January 24, the Storm Prediction Center issued an enhanced risk for much of the Gulf Coast region, including a 10% hatched risk area for tornadoes. Throughout the day, a small but significant outbreak of tornadoes impacted the Southern United States, primarily from Southeast Texas to southern Louisiana. Multiple strong tornadoes were confirmed, including a large and destructive low-end EF3 tornado that moved through the southeastern sections of the Houston metropolitan area, impacting the suburbs of Pasadena and Deer Park. This prompted the issuance of a tornado emergency, the first ever issued by the National Weather Service's forecast office in Houston. The intense rain-wrapped tornado inflicted major structural damage to many homes, apartment buildings, churches, and businesses, and downed many trees and power lines. Cars were thrown and mangled, a metal building was destroyed, a senior center sustained major damage, and metal truss electrical transmission towers were toppled to the ground. No fatalities occurred as a result of the EF3 Houston metro tornado, though a few minor injuries were reported. The tornado caused $6.6 million in damage. The same storm also produced two EF0 tornadoes that caused minor damage in the Houston suburbs of Sienna and Pearland prior to spawning the EF3 tornado. Elsewhere, a brief EF2 tornado unroofed a house and destroyed a barn near Nome. Three people were injured by another EF2 tornado that touched down near Orangefield before striking the outskirts of Orange, causing major damage to mobile homes, houses, and outbuildings before crossing into Louisiana and inflicting more severe damage to numerous structures north of Vinton. Several metal buildings were also damaged, and many large trees were snapped or uprooted by this tornado as well. In Louisiana, another EF2 tornado struck the small community of Gaytine, where houses had their roofs torn off, a mobile home was destroyed, a metal building was heavily damaged, and a fifth-wheel RV trailer was flipped. In Ventress, three people were injured by an EF1 tornado that destroyed a few mobile homes. Three additional weak tornadoes touched down in Florida on January 25 before the outbreak came to an end. A total of 15 tornadoes were confirmed. In addition to the tornadoes, the storms also produced flash flooding and a daily record for rainfall was set in Houston, at 4.05 in (103 mm). The flash flooding forced SH 99 to temporarily close.

February
There were 56 confirmed tornadoes in the United States in the month of February.

February 1 (Germany)
On February 1, multiple severe thunderstorms formed in Germany, producing two tornadoes. The first was a short-lived F1 tornado which tracked for 0.2 km (0.1 mi), damaging the roofs of 14 homes in Hinte. The second tornado struck areas near the small villages of Getmold, Lashorst and Hedem along a 5.3 km (3.3 mi)-long path, snapping or uprooting large trees and heavily damaging the roofs of multiple homes. A car was damaged by a falling tree near Lashorst, a carriage house had its roof torn off, and a carport was damaged at a farmstead. The most significant damage occurred in an area of pine forest, where many large trees were completely mowed down or stripped of their limbs, and a few tree trunks were snapped off and thrown some distance into nearby fields. Based on the severe tree damage, the second tornado was given an F2 rating. Over 85 severe weather reports were documented in Europe that day, 69 of those in Germany.

February 8–9
On February 8, the Storm Prediction Center issued an enhanced risk of severe weather for parts of Arkansas, Mississippi, and Louisiana, including a 10% hatched risk area for tornadoes. A line of severe storms produced damaging straight-line winds and multiple tornadoes in Mississippi and Louisiana throughout the day, a couple of which were strong. An EF2 tornado struck the village of Tangipahoa in eastern Louisiana, damaging trees and structures in town, including a church and gas station convenience store. Numerous mobile homes were damaged or destroyed in town, a vacant business was unroofed, and many trees were snapped or uprooted as well. Another EF2 tornado struck the community of Grand Prairie, Louisiana, where a well-built home had its roof torn off and trees were snapped. A few other homes and outbuildings along its path suffered more minor damage. Several other weaker tornadoes touched down during the evening across the same region. After roughly 24 hours of no activity, a ninth tornado associated with the same storm system touched down in the Florida Panhandle late on February 9, snapping or uprooting numerous trees near Eucheeanna. In total, nine tornadoes were confirmed.

February 16–17
On February 16, the Storm Prediction Center issued an enhanced risk for parts of the Southeastern United States and the Ohio Valley region, including a 10% hatched risk area for tornadoes in parts of Mississippi, Alabama, and Tennessee. Severe thunderstorms developed later that day, producing damaging winds, large hail, and several tornadoes, a couple of which were strong. An EF2 tornado near Pindall, Arkansas, destroyed barns, pushed a house off its foundation, snapped trees, and injured two people. Another EF2 tornado injured one person, snapped many trees, and knocked over a few metal truss electrical transmission towers near Ripley, Mississippi, before weakening and striking the north edge of town, where a few homes and businesses sustained minor damage. An EF1 tornado that occurred near Wesson, Mississippi, rolled and destroyed a mobile home, and damaged two other residences. An EF1 tornado near Ramer, Tennessee, inflicted heavy roof damage to a home and destroyed two garages, and another EF1 tornado near Lewisburg damaged homes, destroyed barns and outbuildings, and downed trees. On February 17, an EF1 tornado caused considerable damage as it moved through the south side of LaGrange, Georgia, not far from where a damaging EF2 tornado had struck the prior month. Many trees were snapped or uprooted in LaGrange, while homes and businesses sustained roof and window damage. Overall, a total of 13 tornadoes were confirmed. In addition to tornadoes, straight-line winds from the system led to a tree falling at the Northwestern University campus, injuring four people. Flooding caused by the storms also killed two people, one in Kentucky and one in West Virginia. Flooding also resulted in I-65 being shut down near Cullman, Alabama.

February 21
An EF2 tornado touched down in Mercer County, New Jersey, only the fifth February tornado to touch down in the state during February, and the first F2/EF2 to touch down in the state since February 2, 1973. The storm resulted in Quakerbridge Road being blocked off in Lawrence Township and Hamilton Township. U.S. Route 1 was also closed in both directions in Lawrenceville as a result of the storm. Around 75 residents were displaced due to the tornado, with 27 residences being rendered uninhabitable.

February 26–27
On February 26, a large storm system produced a wide range of significant weather events across a large area of the United States, ranging from heavy snow to tornadoes. The Storm Prediction Center issued a moderate risk for west-central Oklahoma for a 45% hatched risk area for damaging winds. The outlook also included a 10% hatched risk area for tornadoes. An enhanced risk also extended from the Texas Panhandle to southwestern Missouri. Aided by very strong wind shear, a powerful squall line of severe thunderstorms containing damaging straight-line winds and multiple embedded QLCS tornadoes formed and moved through the risk area later that night. A high-end EF2 tornado obliterated manufactured homes, tossed vehicles, and killed one person as it moved through the outskirts of Cheyenne, Oklahoma, injuring three others as well. The line of severe storms also produced five tornadoes that impacted areas in and around the Oklahoma City metropolitan area, a couple of which were strong. This included a high-end EF2 tornado that struck the southeastern part of Norman, where homes and businesses sustained major damage, self-storage units were destroyed, cars were flipped, and 12 people were injured. Another high-end EF2 tornado also caused significant damage to homes and other structures near Shawnee. In addition, there were widespread reports of damaging straight-line winds that reached up to 70–80 mph (110–130 km/h), with locally higher gusts reported, including a 114 mph (183 km/h) wind gust in Memphis, Texas. Tornadic activity continued the next day in Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio as the system pushed eastward. Several weak tornadoes occurred, including a high-end EF1 tornado that touched down in Jacksonburg, Ohio, before it passed near Middletown, causing considerable damage to a few homes, barns, and trees. In all, 30 tornadoes were confirmed, resulting in one tornado-related fatality; the 12 tornadoes in Oklahoma set the record for the most tornadoes ever recorded in the state in the month of February. In addition, there were 12 other non-tornado-related fatalities that occurred as a result of the storm system.

March
There were 195 confirmed tornadoes in the United States in the month of March.

March 1–3
In early March, a powerful storm system brought widespread severe weather, including multiple tornadoes, across a large portion of the Eastern United States. On March 1, the Storm Prediction Center outlined an enhanced risk across areas in Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Mississippi, and Tennessee, including a 10% hatched risk for tornadoes. In Shottsville, Alabama, a low-end EF1 tornado caused minor damage to a church, before downing trees and damaging the roof of a house elsewhere along the path. A stronger, but short-lived high-end EF1 tornado touched down in a subdivision near Hazel Green, Alabama, where a few homes sustained extensive damage and a vehicle was flipped onto its side. On March 2, the Storm Prediction Center issued a moderate risk for the following day for parts of Texas, Arkansas, and Louisiana. A 15% hatched risk for tornadoes was in place across the Ark-La-Tex region, with the potential for strong tornadoes noted, although this was downgraded to a 10% hatched area due to lingering uncertainties about the convective modes that day. However, a 45% hatched area for wind damage was also in place in the same general area as well. A high-end EF2 tornado completely demolished two chicken houses and a mobile home, snapped many trees and power poles, partially unroofed a house, and injured five people near Kirby, Arkansas. Several other tornadoes touched down throughout the threat area, though all were weak. This included an EF1 tornado that damaged numerous homes and a few businesses as it moved through the southeastern side of Shreveport, Louisiana, injuring two people. A high-end EF1 tornado also damaged multiple buildings as it impacted Pickton, Texas. On March 3, the storm system moved into the Ohio Valley region, where an EF2 tornado in the small community or Fremont, Kentucky, destroyed outbuildings, heavily damaged a church, and tore the roofs off of a few homes. In Vanderburgh County, Indiana, an EF1 tornado unroofed a church and damaged many homes and trees in the Saint Joseph community. Another EF1 tornado tracked from Duff to the northwestern part of Jasper, downing many trees, damaging or destroying a few barns, and inflicting roof and siding damage to homes. In Highland County, Ohio, an EF1 tornado caused considerable damage to homes and outbuildings in and around Pricetown, downed numerous trees and tree limbs, and tore much of the roof off a church elsewhere along its path. Farther south, two EF1 tornadoes in Alabama caused minor to moderate damage in and around Section and Rosalie. An EF1 tornado also downed many trees in and around Gray Court, South Carolina, some of which landed on houses. In addition to the tornadoes, the severe thunderstorms brought numerous reports of damaging straight-line winds and flooding. Overall, a total of 33 tornadoes were confirmed. While no tornado-related fatalities occurred, at least 13 non-tornado-related deaths occurred as a result of the storm system.

March 9 (France)
On March 9, a strong tornado was caught on video from multiple angles as it impacted areas in and around several small towns and villages in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region of France, resulting in extensive damage. The tornado first badly damaged the roof of a school in Masbaraud-Mérignat before it moved to the northeast and struck Pontarion, where multiple homes and other structures had their roofs heavily damaged, and one house was completely unroofed. Vehicles in town were damaged by flying debris, trees and power poles were downed, a large masonry storage building was partially destroyed, and roof tiles and other projectiles were found driven into the exterior insulation layers of homes. The tornado also caused significant tree damage as it moved through wooded areas outside of Pontarion, snapping and uprooting many large trees, while multiple outbuildings were damaged or destroyed as well. Towards the end of the path, 17 homes sustained minor damage in the Le Donzeil area before the tornado dissipated. The tornado was rated F2 by the ESSL (European Severe Storms Laboratory) and the French Observatory of Tornadoes and Violent Thunderstorms (Keraunos). Keraunos noted that the environment where the tornado formed was conducive for tornado development, as high instability and shear were present in France that day.

March 13 (Saudi Arabia)
A large dusty tornado caused significant damage as it touched down near the outskirts of Taif, Saudi Arabia on March 13, resulting in one fatality. A few buildings sustained major damage, including loss of roofs and exterior walls. Power poles and iron fence posts were knocked over, while cars and trucks were thrown and severely damaged. A man was killed by flying debris, and at least one person was severely injured.

March 22
On the morning of March 22, a high-end EF1 tornado impacted the Los Angeles suburb of Montebello, causing considerable damage. The tornado moved through an industrial area, where multiple warehouses had large sections of their roofs torn off. One warehouse sustained almost total collapse of its roof and had an HVAC unit ripped off. Signs were damaged or destroyed, windows were shattered, and numerous vehicles were damaged by flying debris. A power pole and some trees were downed, a semi-trailer was tipped over, and debris was scattered throughout the area. One person was injured. This was the strongest tornado to impact the Greater Los Angeles metro area since 1983. The storm also brought 1.01 in (26 mm) of rain to Los Angeles, breaking a daily rainfall record.

March 24 (India)
A large and photogenic cone tornado struck Fazilka in India on March 24, resulting in significant damage. At least 50 unreinforced masonry homes were severely damaged or completely destroyed. Farming equipment was tossed, trees were snapped or uprooted, power poles were downed, and significant crop damage occurred in farm fields. No fatalities occurred, though at least 12 people were injured.

March 24–27
Beginning on March 24, a four-day severe weather and tornado outbreak impacted the Southeastern United States. The outbreak began in the morning with two EF1 tornadoes causing injuries in Texas before more significant tornadoes impacted Mississippi that night. One long-tracked and violent high-end EF4 tornado with windspeeds up to 195 mph prompted a tornado emergency for Rolling Fork and Silver City, causing major damage in both communities, with widespread and catastrophic damage occurring throughout much of Rolling Fork. A total of 17 people were killed by the Rolling Fork tornado. Another intense tornado from the same storm prompted another tornado emergency as it struck Winona; three people were killed by this EF3 tornado. Another destructive EF3 tornado from the same storm also caused major damage near or in the communities of Egypt, New Wren, and Amory, resulting in major damage and two fatalities. More tornadoes touched down in Alabama and Tennessee later that night and into the early morning hours of March 25, including an EF2 tornado that caused damage in Fayetteville, Tennessee, and another EF2 tornado that killed one person in Hartselle, Alabama, early on March 25. From March 26 into March 27, the slow-moving storm system completely stalled out, and more severe weather occurred over the next two days as well, producing several additional tornadoes, including an EF3 tornado that struck just north of West Point, Georgia, on March 26, causing major damage to trees and houses and injuring five people. A total of 33 tornadoes were confirmed as a result of this outbreak, which killed 23 people and injured many others.

March 31 – April 1
A large, widespread, and deadly tornado outbreak impacted large portions of the Midwestern, Southern, and Eastern United States. A high risk was issued for two areas in the Mississippi Valley on the morning of March 31; it was the first high risk issuance since March 25, 2021. That afternoon, a high-end EF3 wedge tornado passed through the Little Rock, Arkansas, metro area, prompting a tornado emergency as it inflicted significant damage to numerous structures. One person was killed by that tornado. Later, an intense high-end EF3 tornado caused severe damage near Martinsburg, Iowa. The same storm then produced a violent low-end EF4 tornado that destroyed multiple homes near Keota. The Iowa towns of Coralville, Hills, Mediapolis, and Charlotte all sustained significant damage after being impacted by EF2 tornadoes. EF2 tornadoes also caused severe damage in Sherman and Geneseo, Illinois, as well. Several other large tornadoes touched down throughout that afternoon and evening, including an EF3 tornado that killed four people in Wynne, Arkansas, and another EF3 tornado that killed a person in Covington, Tennessee. An EF1 tornado that struck Belvidere, Illinois, collapsed the roof of the Apollo Theatre, which was hosting a sold-out concert, resulting in one fatality and over 40 injuries. Later, another destructive EF3 tornado killed six people when it struck Robinson, Illinois, and Sullivan, Indiana, before the cell traveled northwest, producing another EF3 tornado that destroyed homes, tossed cars and farm machinery, and killed two people near Spencer. The same supercell later spawned an EF3 tornado which directly impacted the town of Whiteland, where a warehouse and many homes were destroyed. Another destructive and long-tracked EF3 tornado killed nine people in McNairy County, Tennessee, impacting the outskirts of Bethel Springs and Adamsville. A high-end EF3 tornado north of Hazel Green, Alabama, also destroyed homes and killed a person early on April 1. More severe weather occurred the next day along the eastern Great Lakes and East Coast, producing widespread damaging winds along with isolated hail and tornadoes. This included one destructive EF3 tornado that killed a person in Sussex County, Delaware. The tornado was the largest ever recorded in Delaware and only the second killer tornado and the second tornado rated F3/EF3 in the state since modern records began in 1950. Seven tornadoes also touched down in New Jersey, three of which reached EF2 intensity. In all, 147 tornadoes making it the 3rd largest tornado outbreak in recorded history, along with 26 tornadic fatalities, one indirect tornado-related fatality, and at least 218 injuries were confirmed as a result of this tornado outbreak. Six non-tornadic deaths also occurred during the outbreak.

April
There were 160 confirmed tornadoes in the United States in the month of April.

April 4–5
Another severe weather and tornado outbreak affected the Midwestern United States, Mississippi Valley, and Great Lakes in early April. On April 4, a moderate risk was issued by the SPC for parts of Illinois and Iowa, with a second moderate risk outlined for parts of Arkansas and Missouri. A 15% hatched risk area for tornadoes was in place for both moderate risk areas. Multiple tornadoes touched down throughout the afternoon and evening, including two EF1 tornadoes that touched down in the Quad Cities metro area, downing trees and damaging the roofs of homes in Rock Island and Moline, Illinois. Near Pleasantville, Iowa, a narrow and highly photogenic high-end EF1 tornado was caught on video by many storm chasers, and caused damage to homes and outbuildings. The most intense tornado of the event was a large high-end EF3 tornado that destroyed homes and injured four people near Lewistown, Illinois, before striking Bryant, causing significant damage in the small village. A storm chaser's vehicle was rolled by the tornado, though he was not injured. A brief EF2 tornado ripped the roof off a gas station in Colona, while another EF2 tornado destroyed outbuildings and uplifted the roof of a house near Geneseo. A high-end EF1 tornado also caused damage to homes, garages, and trees in Table Grove. During the early morning hours of April 5, a nighttime high-end EF2 tornado struck the communities of Grassy and Glen Allen, Missouri, causing severe damage as multiple homes had their roofs torn off, a few of which sustained failure of exterior walls. Outbuildings and mobile homes were also obliterated by the tornado, with five people being killed in one of the mobile homes. This became the deadliest tornado in Missouri since the 2011 Joplin tornado.Weak tornadoes continued to touch down across parts of the Ohio Valley later that day, including three EF1 tornadoes that caused considerable damage in the Louisville, Kentucky, metro area. One of these tornadoes reached high-end EF1 strength and unroofed an apartment building in the Pleasure Ridge Park neighborhood. The other two tornadoes damaged warehouses and businesses in the suburb of Watterson Park, one of which damaged the Yum! Brands headquarters. A non-tornadic fatality occurred in Louisville when a man who was walking his dog was killed by a falling tree. Farther east, an EF0 tornado caused minor damage in the town of Pleasantville, Ohio. As a result of the storms, the Cincinnati Reds game against the Chicago Cubs was postponed, while Chicago O’Hare International Airport had a ground stop. The anticipated severe weather in the Eastern United States on April 6 resulted in the New York Mets, Baltimore Orioles, and Philadelphia Phillies postponing their home openers. In all, five tornado-related fatalities and 27 tornadoes were confirmed, with one non-tornadic fatality as well. The National Centers for Environmental Information documented that this storm system caused $2.2 billion (2023 USD) in damage.

April 10 (Europe)
On April 10, a few tornadoes occurred in the Mediterranean region of Europe. The most significant tornado touched down in the Ağaçören District of Aksaray Province in the Central Anatolia Region of Turkey. It tracked through or near the villages of Camili, Avşar, Kırımini and Göllü along a 22 km-path (14 mi) with a maximum width of 200 m (220 yd). The tornado, which was rated F2, destroyed the roofs of homes, partially collapsed walls, and killed farm animals. Masonry outbuildings were destroyed, a tractor-trailer was overturned, while trees and power line pylons were downed as well. The minaret tower at the Göllü mosque collapsed, injuring a 26-year-old man. A separate F1 tornado also struck areas in and around Budak, where another mosque also sustained collapse of its minaret tower, outbuildings were destroyed at dairy farms, and some homes had roof damage. In addition, a waterspout made landfall near Pizzo in Southern Italy, causing no damage.

April 15
On April 15, a linear complex of severe thunderstorms with embedded circulations developed in Missouri and moved eastward through the St. Louis metro area, producing multiple tornadoes. A strong EF2 tornado destroyed a small house near Vichy, Missouri, heavily damaged metal airplane hangars at Rolla National Airport, and injured five people. An EF1 tornado moved through the St. Louis suburbs of Fenton and Sunset Hills, causing damage to homes, warehouses, and trees. The towns of Hillsboro, Festus, and Pevely were also directly hit by EF1 tornadoes, resulting in minor to moderate damage. Another EF1 tornado struck Belleville, Illinois, where homes, apartment buildings, and businesses had roofing blown off and large trees were snapped or uprooted, some of which landed on structures. Farther south, an isolated EF1 tornado caused damage to trees and homes near Ringgold, Louisiana. A total of 14 tornadoes were confirmed, and numerous reports of damaging straight-line winds were received as well. The National Centers for Environmental Information documented that this storm system caused $1.1 billion (2023 USD) in damage. The line of storms also forced the Kansas City Royals to postpone a baseball game against the Atlanta Braves.

April 15 (China)
A tornado struck areas near the large city of Linyi, Shandong Province, with significant damage observed in the Tancheng County village of Lizhuangzhen. The tornado was captured on video from multiple angles, some from close range. Homes and other structures were severely damaged, including some that sustained loss of roofs and exterior walls, while tractors and cars were tossed. Metal truss transmission towers, power poles, and masonry fences were toppled over, and outbuilding structures were destroyed as well. Trees were snapped, and several people were injured. Another tornado was reported in northern Shandong Province as well. Neither of the tornadoes were officially rated.

April 19–20
On April 19, a tornado outbreak impacted areas in the southern Great Plains. In Oklahoma, 18 tornadoes touched down and moved erratically near the southern and eastern outskirts of the Oklahoma City metropolitan area. Several of the tornadoes were strong, and most of them were produced by a large, slow-moving supercell that moved east-northeastward. A large high-end EF3 tornado impacted the community of Cole, heavily damaging or destroying homes, mobile homes, and other structures, resulting in a fatality. An indirect fatality from the tornado was also confirmed. The supercell also produced multiple weak tornadoes and two large, high-end EF2 tornadoes that caused significant damage near Etowah, before merging with another tornadic supercell to its west. This cluster of storms spawned a large, broad mesocyclone that produced several circulations that rotated around each other due to the Fujiwhara effect. These circulations produced multiple erratic-moving strong tornadoes after sunset, including EF3 and EF2 tornadoes south and north of Pink respectively, and a very large, high-end EF2 tornado that struck Shawnee, where numerous homes and other buildings sustained extensive damage or were destroyed, including buildings at Oklahoma Baptist University and Shawnee High School. A news-gathering Bell 206 B3 JetRanger helicopter operated by Tulsa television station KOTV was damaged at the Shawnee Regional Airport, along with several hangars.Further north, a supercell produced a series of eight tornadoes in Chase County, Kansas, near Strong City, including an EF0 tornado that overturned a semi-truck near Elmdale, causing an injury. Two EF2 tornadoes near Strong City caused major damage to outbuildings, silos, power poles, and trees, while an EF0 tornado caused minor tree damage in the northern part of town. An EF1 tornado caused minor to moderate damage as it moved through Cottonwood Falls, and another EF0 tornado injured a person in a vehicle near Saffordville. Three EFU tornadoes were also confirmed in Iowa. Another round of severe weather occurred the next day from southern Wisconsin to South Texas, including three weak tornadoes in Illinois and Texas, and hail in Illinois up to 3.00 in (7.6 cm) wide. Federal disaster assistance was requested in Oklahoma following the tornado outbreak. Overall, a total of 32 tornadoes were confirmed. One direct tornado-related fatality occurred, along with an indirect fatality and 188 injuries. The tornado outbreak resulted in $1.9 billion in damage.

April 20 (Turkey)
Two tornadoes caused damage in Turkey on April 20. The first tornado struck the outskirts of Pazarcık, Kahramanmaraş, where roofing was torn from buildings, cars and storage containers were flipped, and trees were downed. The tornado struck a camp where people affected by the 2023 Turkey–Syria earthquake were housed, where tents were torn apart and struck by flying debris. Three people were killed at the camp and 150 others were injured. The tornado was rated F1 on the Fujita scale by the European Severe Storms Laboratory. A second F1 tornado struck the village of Tatlıçayır, Diyarbakır Province, where homes sustained roof damage, a frail masonry outbuilding was destroyed, trees were downed, and farm animals were injured.

April 21 (Myanmar)
At around 6:10 p.m. on April 21, a strong tornado struck Central Myanmar in Leiway Township near the capital city of Naypyitaw, causing major damage and multiple fatalities in the villages of Tada Oo and Aung Myin Kone. A total of 232 homes were destroyed, and many trees and power lines were downed. A small clinic and two Buddhist monasteries were also destroyed. Eight people were killed and another 128 were hospitalized as a result of the tornado.

April 22
Several tornadoes touched down in the Eastern United States on April 22. An EF0 tornado in Mooresville, North Carolina, caused minor tree, fence, and house damage. Another EF0 tornado touched down in Poolesville, Maryland, where minor tree and structure damage occurred. The town of Womelsdorf, Pennsylvania, was struck by an EF1 tornado, which snapped trees and power poles, damaged a few structures and vehicles, and flipped a set of metal bleachers. The most significant tornado of the event was an EF2 tornado that produced its most intense damage in rural forested areas north of Jeffersonville, New York, where a metal truss transmission tower was collapsed, garages and barns were heavily damaged or destroyed, and many large hardwood trees were snapped or uprooted. The tornado unroofed a couple of buildings in Roscoe and Rockland shortly before it dissipated. Two children were killed in Pennsylvania as a result of trees that were blown over by straight-line winds. The next morning, heavy rainfall fell in the Northeast, with a daily record of 3.13 in (80 mm) of rain in Hartford, Connecticut. The rainfall total in Central Park was 2.14 in (54 mm).  A total of eight tornadoes were confirmed.

April 22–23 (Oman)
On April 22, a tornado was caught on video by local residents as it struck Jalan Bani Bu Ali in Ash Sharqiyah South Governorate in eastern Oman. The tornado damaged many homes, killed farm animals, and injured a woman. The storm system that spawned the tornado also resulted in torrential rainfall and flash flooding. On the following day, Jalan Bani Bu Ali was hit by another tornado.

April 27–30
In late April, a slow-moving weather system produced scattered tornadoes in the Southern and Eastern United States throughout a four-day period. On April 27, the Storm Prediction Center issued a slight risk of severe weather for the Gulf Coast region, including a 5% risk of tornadoes. A strong EF2 tornado struck the small town of Hosford, Florida, downing many trees and inflicting major damage to a few homes. A high-end EF1 tornado caused damage in Lynn Haven, while a few other weak tornadoes touched down in other parts of Florida and Georgia. On April 28, an EF0 tornado caused minor damage in Boynton Beach, a brief EF0 tornado also caused minor damage near Elkin, North Carolina, and an EF1 tornado downed many trees and injured two people at Fort Hood (now Fort Cavazos) in Texas. On April 29, the Storm Prediction Center issued a slight risk of severe weather for most of Florida and southeast Georgia, including a 5% risk area for tornadoes. A MCS off the coast of Florida produced damaging straight-line winds and heavy rain throughout the day. In Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, a high-end EF2 tornado a partially unroofed an apartment building, largely destroyed a manufactured home, heavily damaged a dry-cleaning business, and downed many trees and large metal light poles. Along US 1, the tornado was caught on video as it flipped and tossed cars. During the early morning hours of April 30, a high-end EF1 tornado destroyed a metal storage building in rural Charlotte County, Florida. Later in the afternoon, clusters of severe storms affected South Carolina, eastern North Carolina and the Hampton Roads area in Virginia. One embedded supercell made its way into the northern sections of Virginia Beach, Virginia, and produced an intense EF3 tornado that touched down in residential areas of the city, snapping or uprooting trees, overturning vehicles, and causing significant structural damage. Multiple large and well-built homes had their roofs torn off and suffered collapse of their top floor exterior walls. The tornado then struck Fort Story, where buildings sustained less intense damage before the tornado moved out into the Atlantic Ocean. Numerous videos and photographs taken by Virginia Beach residents showed a "stovepipe" tornado with an audible roar. In addition to tornadoes, flash flooding affected the entire East Coast on April 30. A total of 12 tornadoes were confirmed.

April 28 (Indonesia)
A significant tornado struck four different villages in the Kodi District, Southwest Sumba at 2:30 pm Central Indonesian Time (6:30 am UTC). It damaged or destroyed 21 homes in total, killing nine people.

May
There were 172 confirmed tornadoes in the United States in May.

May 6 (Europe)
An F2 tornado caused damage in the Sultan Alaaddin, Akarca and Ören districts as it moved through the city of Anamur, Turkey. Homes and apartment buildings sustained damage to their roofs, windows, and balconies, and some businesses were also damaged. Vehicles were flipped and tossed, and trees and power lines were downed as well. Around 100 large commercial greenhouses were damaged or destroyed, and 13 people were injured as a result of the tornado. In Austria, an F1 tornado struck the town of Ziersdorf and caused damage to outbuildings and the roofs of several homes. A section of roofing from one home was torn off and thrown 50 meters, two cars were damaged by flying debris, and trees and telephone lines were also damaged.

May 6–7
Early on May 6, a line of severe storms pushed through southern Louisiana, producing damaging winds. One low-end EF1 tornado near Morse damaged several homes, destroyed outbuildings, and injured one person. Later that day, a severe weather outbreak impacted the Central United States. Multiple tornadoes touched down in Minnesota and South Dakota, but all were weak and remained over open country, causing no damage. In Missouri, a lone supercell thunderstorm produced multiple tornadoes, including one high-end EF0 tornado that damaged the roofs of several homes and a church in Trenton, as well as a high-end EF2 tornado north of Linneus that damaged or destroyed several homes and outbuildings. The next morning, an EF1 tornado struck the Indiana University Southeast campus in New Albany, Indiana, downing trees, damaging apartment buildings, and injuring two people. An EF0 tornado also caused minor damage to homes and tree branches in Georgetown. An EF1 tornado moved through the western part of Louisville, Kentucky and the suburb of Shively, snapping many trees and downing large tree limbs. In Shelbyville, a brief EF0 tornado caused damage to a gas station and a Stanley Black & Decker plant. Farther west in Iowa, an EF1 tornado damaged large outbuildings, trees, and a batting cage in West Liberty. A Taylor Swift Eras Tour concert in Nashville was delayed multiple hours due to severe storms in the area. A total of 24 tornadoes were confirmed, and damage from the severe weather outbreak totaled $1.1 billion.

May 10–13
Between May 10 and May 13, a tornado outbreak affected the Great Plains. On May 10, multiple weak tornadoes touched down in Colorado, including an EF1 tornado that unroofed a cabin near Woodrow. A couple of EFU tornadoes that caused no damage were confirmed in Arkansas and Kansas as well. On May 11, the Storm Prediction Center issued an enhanced risk for the central Great Plains and a slight risk for part of the Gulf Coast. Numerous tornadoes touched down in both areas, though all were weak. This included an EF1 tornado that downed trees and damaged buildings in Shreveport, Louisiana, and a high-end EF1 multiple-vortex tornado that caused considerable damage to school buildings, outbuildings, homes, and power poles in Weskan, Kansas. In Oklahoma, another high-end EF1 tornado heavily damaged homes and destroyed outbuildings near Cole before it weakened and caused minor tree and roof shingle damage at the south edge of Goldsby. An EF1 tornado also struck Noble, where a donut shop had its roof blown off and some other businesses had severe roof damage. The storms also resulted in Denver recording their 8th wettest day on record, and hail forced a ground stop at Denver International Airport. Amtrak's northbound Heartland Flyer was delayed for almost three hours that day due severe warnings north of its station stop in Purcell, Oklahoma.On May 13, another enhanced risk was issued for Nebraska, where a majority of the strongest tornadoes of the outbreak occurred. This included two large EF2 tornadoes that passed near Uehling and Lyons, destroying numerous barns, garages, grain bins, and farm buildings, and damaging several homes. The two tornadoes also snapped many power poles, downed numerous trees, and damaged farming equipment. The Lyons tornado also caused two injuries. A low-end EF2 tornado near North Bend damaged or destroyed grain bins and outbuildings, flipped irrigation pivot sprinklers, and shifted a house slightly off its foundation. A narrow EF2 tornado caused severe tree damage near Chambers, including some debarking. A high-end EF1 tornado hit the southeastern part of Anselmo, where a shed was flipped, many trees were snapped, and tree branches were driven into building's exteriors. A large multiple-vortex wedge tornado that passed near Greeley and Spalding flipped and bent irrigation pivots, blew out the windows of two vehicles, scoured gravel off a dirt road, and caused damage to trees and power poles. It was rated high-end EF1, though storm chaser and meteorologist Reed Timmer recorded a 163 mph (262 km/h) wind gust as it passed over his Dominator tornado intercept vehicle, indicating that it was capable of producing high-end EF3 damage. Other tornadoes touched down in Oklahoma and Kansas, including a low-end EF2 tornado near Hamlin, Kansas that snapped trees, destroyed an outbuilding, heavily damaged a trailer, and caused less severe damage to a house. Early the next morning on May 13, a high-end EF1 tornado struck Laguna Heights, Texas, where numerous poorly built mobile homes were heavily damaged or destroyed, and a man was killed inside one of them. Businesses and some industrial buildings in Laguna Heights also sustained major damage, and 11 people were injured. More tornadoes touched down later that afternoon across Iowa, with a few others occurring in Illinois, Oklahoma, and New Mexico, all of which were weak and caused little to no damage. Flooding also inundated basements and roads in Laurens and Knoxville as rainfall totaled near 7 in (180 mm) in some areas in Iowa. The threat of tornadoes across Iowa prompted Donald Trump to cancel outdoor rallies in the state. In all, 94 tornadoes were confirmed and damages from the tornado outbreak totaled $2.4 billion.

June
There were 251 confirmed tornadoes in the United States in June.

June 1 (China)
Multiple tornadoes impacted parts of Liaoning Province in northeastern China on June 1. A destructive tornado moved through parts of Fuxin City and areas outside outside of the city, heavily damaging or destroying at least 60 homes. Multiple apartment buildings and other structures were also heavily damaged, and buildings were destroyed at a coal mine as well. Cars and tractors were tossed and damaged, and trees and power lines were downed along the path. No fatalities were reported, but 13 people were injured. A narrow but significant tornado impacted farms and rural areas outside of Kaiyuan, destroying homes and outbuildings, snapping trees, and scouring crops from fields. Kaiyan had previously been hit by a violent EF4 tornado in July of 2019. A third tornado occurred in the Shenyang area, and a fourth was confirmed near Huludao. None of the tornadoes received official intensity ratings.

June 14–19
Multiple rounds of severe and tornadic thunderstorms impacted a large portion of the South, Midwest, and Great Plains in the middle of June. On June 14, multiple severe thunderstorm watches and tornado watches were issued from the Ark-La-Tex region to northern Florida, an area that normally does not see this type of extreme weather during that time of year. A large EF2 tornado moved between Blakely and Arlington, Georgia, knocking down power lines and trees and severely damaging a home, injuring the residents inside. More tornadoes were reported later that afternoon and evening across Alabama and Georgia while an EF2 tornado caused major damage in Cass County, Texas. There were also over 300 reports of large hail and damaging winds, including wind gusts reaching as high as 82 mph (132 km/h) and hail up to 5 inches (13 cm) in diameter in Mississippi. On June 15, the Storm Prediction Center issued a moderate risk for severe weather across much of Oklahoma, along with a small part of Texas and Kansas. The risk was driven by 45% hatched areas for both large hail and damaging winds. A small 10% area for tornadoes covering the eastern part of the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles as well as all of Southwestern Oklahoma was also present. That afternoon, multiple rounds of intense supercells formed across this region and pushed eastward. One of the cells produced a destructive and deadly low-end EF3 tornado that tracked through Perryton, Texas, causing significant damage to a mobile home park and destroying multiple downtown and industrial buildings, killing at least three people, and injuring about 100 others. Other tornadoes were confirmed in Oklahoma and Texas along with swath of wind and hail damage. Supercell thunderstorms also developed along the western part of Lake Erie and moved southeastward, spawning several tornadoes, including three that were rated EF2. One of these tornadoes caused considerable damage in the Point Place neighborhood in Toledo, Ohio. Severe weather also continued to impact the Gulf Coast and Southeastern United States into the early morning hours of June 16, where many instances of damaging winds and large hail were reported along with isolated tornadoes. Flash flooding in Pensacola, Florida, resulted from 9.23 in (234 mm) of rain in five hours, and strong winds blew a tree into a house, killing one person. The flooding triggered a flash flood emergency. A couple of weak tornadoes touched down in the Delaware Valley while more weak tornadoes touched down in Texas, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, and Virginia. By June 16, the storms had left 664,000 customers without power along the Gulf Coast.More rounds of severe storms occurred on June 17, including a powerful MCS that pushed through Northern and Central Oklahoma. Both the Oklahoma City and Tulsa metropolitan areas had widespread wind damage with the latter metropolitan area seeing wind gusts of up to 100 miles per hour (160 km/h) and multiple weak tornadoes. On June 18, more tornadoes were confirmed in Florida and Mississippi, including an EF3 tornado which caused significant damage in Louin, Mississippi, where at least one fatality and 20 injuries occurred. Scattered tornadoes occurred across the Southeast on June 19 as well, including an EF2 tornado that injured six people in Moss Point, Mississippi. Overall, 87 tornadoes were confirmed during this outbreak sequence.

June 20–26 (United States and Canada)
More waves of tornadic activity struck across the Great Plains, Mississippi Valley, Southeastern and Northeastern United States as well as Manitoba and Ontario in Canada the day after the previous outbreak sequence ended. On the evening of June 21, a high-end EF3 tornado struck the western portion of Matador, Texas, resulting in devastating damage, four fatalities, and 15 injuries. Homes along the path of the tornado were leveled or swept completely away, with debris scattered across fields. Businesses were also flattened, trees were debarked and snapped off, and severe ground scouring was documented. Extreme damage to vehicles occurred along the path of the tornado, with cars being thrown long distances and completely mangled. On June 22, two EF1 tornadoes touched down in Colorado and North Carolina. A high end EF1 tornado touched down in Highlands Ranch, a major suburb of Denver. A severe hailstorm also moved through the Denver metropolitan area, which resulted in nearly 100 injuries at the Red Rocks Amphitheater before a concert. Severe weather in Colorado forced a Major League Soccer game between the Colorado Rapids and Vancouver Whitecaps to be postponed. A severe squall line also led to a record wind gust at George Bush Intercontinental Airport in Houston of 97 mph (156 km/h), surpassing the record from Hurricane Ike. The outbreak continued into June 23 with more tornadoes being reported in Wyoming, Oklahoma and Colorado, including an EF3 tornado that caused significant damage near Granada.
An EF2 tornado in Nebraska also prompted the issuance of tornado emergency for Scottsbluff and Gering. More tornadoes touched down over Minnesota and Iowa on June 24, including an EF2 tornado that passed just east of Mahnomen, Minnesota. Several strong tornadoes occurred the next day in Indiana and Kentucky, including a deadly EF2 tornado that struck Rusk, Indiana, killing one person and injuring another. A total of 113 tornadoes touched down in the outbreak sequence along with five tornadic deaths, three non-tornadic deaths, and over 120 injuries.

July
There were 111 tornadoes confirmed in the United States in July.

July 1 (Canada)
A violent EF4 tornado, estimated at 620 m (680 yd) wide, struck Mountain View County, Alberta, Canada, at 1:45 p.m. MDT (19:45 UTC). Areas between Didsbury and Carstairs were hit hardest before the tornado crossed Highway 2. Three homes were destroyed, four were rendered uninhabitable, and five were damaged. One person was injured by debris while sheltering in the basement of her collapsing home, but no fatalities occurred. Tree branches were snapped, power lines were downed, and one gas leak occurred at a destroyed home. Twenty-five cows, twenty chickens, and one horse were also killed. Significant ground scouring occurred near Didsbury. The joint damage survey from Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC), Prairie and Arctic Storm Prediction Centre (PASPC), and the Northern Tornadoes Project (NTP) assigned a maximum rating of low-end EF4 based on one well-built home being completely destroyed, with peak wind speeds estimated at 275 km/h (171 mph). Near this home, a 22,000 lb (10,000 kg) combine was thrown 50 m (160 ft) before being rolled a further 50 to 100 m (160 to 330 ft). This was only the third violent tornado in Alberta history, after the 1987 Edmonton tornado and the 1915 Grassy Lake tornado (also known as the Redcliff Cyclone).

July 12 (Brazil)
A long-tracked storm struck Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, causing severe damage along a path of about 112 kilometres (70 mi). The storm produced at least one tornado, most likely a tornado family during this long track. At least EF2 vegetation damage was documented, with the most severe damage noted in the town of Sede Nova, which was struck by a tornado.

July 12–13 (United States and Canada)
In the early morning, a squall line moved through Nebraska and Iowa producing a few tornadoes, including an EF2 tornado that tore the roof off of a home south of Logan, Iowa. Later in the day, the Storm Prediction Center issued a 10% chance of significant tornadoes for northern Illinois, including Chicago. A low-precipitation supercell produced a photogenic, but damaging high-end EF1 tornado that moved through the Chicago suburbs of Burr Ridge, Countryside, Hodgkins, McCook, Lyons and Stickney, snapping power lines and collapsing the roof and exterior walls of a motel. A particularly dangerous situation tornado warning was issued for Chicago in result of this tornado. Twin tornadoes also touched down near Elgin, Illinois, one of which was rated EF1 while the other was rated EF0. The storms resulted in 172 flights being cancelled and over 550 flights delayed from Chicago O’Hare International Airport. The next day, the storms moved into Southern Ontario and Quebec, where three tornadoes were confirmed by Environment and Climate Change Canada. The first two both touched down in the Ottawa suburb of Barrhaven one minute apart; 125 homes were damaged between the two and one person suffered minor injuries. The third, unrated tornado touched down near Montréal–Mirabel International Airport, although no injuries or damage were reported. The storm also caused 500,000 people to lose power across Southern Quebec.

July 16 (Puerto Rico)
A high-end EF1 tornado touched down in Aguada, Puerto Rico, partially tearing the roof off of one home causing significant interior damage. Another home lost its roof covering material and metal siding. Numerous trees were uprooted and snapped. Peak wind speeds were estimated at 110 mph (180 km/h).

July 17 (China)
An EF2 tornado struck parts spawned by Severe Tropical Storm Talim of the Chinese city of Danzhou.

July 19 (North Carolina)
An intense multiple-vortex tornado touched down southwest of Dortches, North Carolina, leaving power poles bent and trees snapped. The tornado then crossed I-95, producing widespread tree damage and shutting down parts of the highway for several hours. As it moved into the city limits of Dortches itself, it strengthened to high-end EF2 intensity, destroying multiple single-wide mobile homes and snapping power poles. The tornado then reached the north side of Rocky Mount after continuing to travel east-northeast, in which it encountered a residential building and collapsed every exterior wall. The tornado later advanced into Belmont Lake Golf Club, where it strengthened to mid-range EF3 intensity. The tornado collapsed a metal transmission tower and caused significant damage to a Pfizer warehouse facility, flipping and destroying nearby semi-trailer trucks. The tornado then weakened slightly as it crossed into Edgecombe County before lifting east of Battleboro.The tornado's peak estimated wind speeds were 150 mph (240 km/h), with a peak width of 600 yards (550 m) and a total path length of 16.5 miles (26.6 km). It caused sixteen injuries, two of them resulting in hospitalization, but no fatalities. 38 homes were damaged. The National Weather Service office in Raleigh did not issue a tornado warning for the storm until the tornado had already been down for six minutes, resulting in scrutiny from some meteorologists on social media, but the National Weather Service defended the warning process and noted that the eventual warning came before the tornado dealt its most significant damage. After law enforcement reported that up to 50,000 pallets of medicine had been damaged at the Pfizer facility, Erin Fox of the University of Utah Health said the damage could lead to shortages of certain drugs while the company deals with the situation. FDA Commissioner Robert Califf later announced that, since hospitals already had the drugs or the drugs were on their way, no significant supply impacts were expected. Pfizer said as the tornado had damaged storage areas but not production equipment, any shortages would be less serious. The tornado caused over $300 million (2023 USD) in damage.

July 22 (Italy)
A strong tornado tracked 14 km in and around Alfonsine, Emilia Romagna, injuring 14 people. Steel power trusses were bent at the base, cars and trucks were moved, heavy damage occurred to crops of various types, trees were snapped or uprooted, objects were lofted for hundreds of meters, and some buildings (partially) collapsed. The tornado was rated IF3 on the International Fujita scale by the European Severe Storms Laboratory.

August
There were 138 tornadoes confirmed in the United States in August.

August 1 (Europe)
A rare tornado touched down in Ilirska Bistrica, Slovenia, damaging houses and felling trees. The tornado, which was rated F1/T3, was associated with an isolated supercell storm. Tornadoes are exceedingly rare in Slovenia and neighboring countries except for Italy. The nearest official weather station, Koseze, reported 107 km/h (30 m/s; 66 mph) winds some distance from the tornado's path. Another tornado had occurred earlier near Jesolo, Italy. The region had been the site of uncommonly severe storm systems throughout June and July 2023.

August 4–8
On August 4, an EF2 tornado directly hit the town of Baring, Missouri, inflicting widespread damage to homes, trees, and other structures while injuring two people. Two days later, on August 6, a large and long-tracked EF2 tornado hit north of Pawnee, Illinois in Sangamon County, damaging or destroying homes and outbuilding before dissipating near Assumption in Christian County, almost an hour after touching down. On August 7, a high-end EF2 tornado hit the western suburbs of Knoxville, Tennessee. As the storm system brought hundreds of damaging wind reports throughout the Northeastern United States on August 7, an intense, low-end EF3 tornado progressed through southern Lewis County, New York, striking the town of Lewis, and causing significant damage at the Snow Ridge Ski Resort at the end of its 16 miles (26 km) track near Turin, New York. On August 8, an EF3 tornado touched down near Yuma, Colorado, where buildings and structures were significantly damaged or destroyed in Yuma County.

August 13 (China)
A deadly EF2 tornado struck parts of Yancheng City, Jiangsu. Approximately 283 residences were damaged or destroyed, two people were reported to have been killed, and at least 15 people were injured.

August 18
Multiple tornadoes impacted portions of southern New England on the morning of August 18. Three tornadoes touched down in Massachusetts, an EF1 tornado touched down in Connecticut, and an EF2 tornado lifted a car on I-295 near Scituate, Rhode Island. This became the first F2/EF2 tornado in the state since 1986. Flooding from the system also shut down I-91 in Connecticut, and a nearby hotel parking lot flooded. Flooding also resulted in standing water along the Grand Central Parkway and Long Island Expressway in Queens.

August 24–25 (United States and Canada)
A severe weather and tornado outbreak occurred across parts of the Great Lakes region and southwestern Ontario during the evening hours of August 24, including in the Grand Rapids and Webberville, Michigan areas, as well as in Metro Detroit. Near Webberville, an EF2 tornado prompted a PDS tornado warning, flipping cars and trapping people in their vehicles on I-96, resulting in two fatalities and four injuries, and causing $75 million in damage. Roofs and buildings collapsed across Kent County due to a high-end EF1 tornado that moved through portions of the county. An EF2 tornado also struck Fayette County, Pennsylvania early on August 25 as well. In Ontario, two tornadoes occurred simultaneously and moved southeastward in the Windsor area. The first one was an EF0 tornado that moved through the west side of Windsor, downing numerous trees and branches, removing roof shingles from homes, and damaging fences. To the east, an EF1 tornado collapsed barns, snapped power poles, damaged grain bins, downed trees and branches down, and removed roof shingles from numerous homes as it passed east of Tecumseh and struck Elmstead before dissipating northeast of Pleasant Park. Severe flooding and damaging winds also affected much of the region and three deaths occurred after a weather-related vehicle accident. Another person was killed in Michigan when a tree fell on a home in Lansing. The storms also resulted in over 700,000 customers losing power in the Great Lakes area, while another 20,000 customers lost power in Ontario. Between the two nations, estimated economic losses reached $880 million.

September
There were 10 tornadoes confirmed in the United States in September.

September 17 (Europe)
On September 17, three tornadoes impacted France and the United Kingdom. A brief landspout struck Séreilhac in Région Limousin.  Around the same time, a significant tornado struck in Mayenne, France, causing damage to or destroying structures, trees, and concrete utility poles were bent. The French Observatory of Tornadoes and Violent Thunderstorms (Keraunos) rated the tornado EF2 on the Enhanced Fujita scale, with winds estimated between 175 to 225 kilometres per hour (109 to 140 mph). The European Severe Storms Laboratory rated the tornado IF2 on the International Fujita scale. In the late evening, a waterspout made landfall on West Beach before tracking through the western and northern suburbs of Littlehampton and then the communities of Wick and Lyminster. This tornado toppled several trees, smashing at least 20 car windows and those of multiple houses. One person sustained minor leg injuries. On September 18, the Met Office noted that "conditions weren't unfavourable" for a small tornado. On September 19, a TORRO site investigator confirmed the event as a tornado. A preliminary analysis suggested the majority of the damage warranted a T1 rating, with a peak of T2.

September 19 (Denmark)
A significant tornado impacted the community of Grønhøj Strand in Jammerbugt Municipality. The tornado picked up a mobile home and threw it 20 metres. Other mobile homes and caravans were overturned or moved and a shed was destroyed. According to the ESSL, the tornado had a track length of 1.2 km, had a maximum path width of 100 metres, and had a maximum intensity of IF2.

September 19 (China)
Two tornadoes moved directly into the city of Suqian, Jiangsu, killing five people and injuring another four. Approximately 1,600 houses were either damaged or completely destroyed. Another tornado struck parts of Funing, Jiangsu, also causing five deaths and four minor injuries. The two tornadoes in Suqian were rated EF2, while the tornado in Funing received an EF3 rating.

September 21 (Germany)
Severe thunderstorms spawned at least one tornado in western Germany, which affected the towns of Nusbaum and Mülbach. Severe damage to roofs and trees was reported, and the tornado has been given a preliminary IF2 rating by the ESSL.

October
There were 25 confirmed tornadoes in the United States in October.

October 4 (Brazil)
A strong tornado developed in southern Brazil, affecting the city of Cascavel, Paraná. Roofs and trees suffered significant damage and a building was completely destroyed. The tornado has been given a F2 rating by SIMEPAR.

October 11–12 (Florida)
A large storm system moved through Florida, spawning several tornadoes. In the early morning hours of October 12, a waterspout offshore of Clearwater Beach moved northeast and made landfall in Dunedin, partially tearing the roof off of an apartment building and earning a low-end EF2 rating. Soon after, another strong EF2 tornado moved through Crystal River, tearing the roof off of one home and collapsing an exterior wall. Later in the morning, another low-end EF2 tornado touched down in Palm Coast, unroofing one home and flipping a car. Four other EF0 tornadoes were also confirmed during this event.

October 28 (United Kingdom)
For the second time in just over a month, another tornado struck the town of Littlehampton. Several trees were snapped, fence panels were destroyed, power lines were brought down, car windows were smashed, and one house had its entire roof ripped off. On October 29, a TORRO site investigator visited the site where the event happened and confirmed that the weather event was a tornado. Additionally, they have provisionally rated the tornado T4 on the TORRO scale, which is equivalent to a low-end F2 tornado. The European severe weather database rated the tornado IF2 on the International Fujita scale.

November
There were 16 tornadoes confirmed in the United States in November.

November 1–4 (Europe)
A significant tornado touched down in Jersey, United Kingdom, on the evening of November 1 into the morning of November 2. One house had its entire roof ripped off and upper story walls destroyed. The tornado was rated IF2.5 by the European Severe Storms Laboratory on the new International Fujita scale (IF-scale). On November 6, TORRO released a statement that rated the tornado T6 on the TORRO scale, which is equivalent to a low-end F3 tornado. On the morning of November 2, another tornado was confirmed in Sompting and northern Lancing in West Sussex. According to TORRO after looking at the damage caused and reports from the public, the tornado’s track was mapped, and the tornado was rated a T2 on the TORRO scale. Later that same day, an IF1 rated tornado struck parts of Castel Focognano in Italy, damaging roofs and trees. On November 4, an intense tornado struck Lavino in Bulgaria. According to the European Severe Storms Laboratory, at least 150 structures were damaged, and one person was slightly injured, earning a rating of IF3. About half an hour later, a significant tornado struck Xánthi, Greece.  A large tree branch fell on a moving bus, causing no injuries. Length of the damage path reached at least 1.5 km (between Geor. Kondyli street and EPS stadiums). This tornado was rated IF2.  Additionally, an unrated tornado struck parts of Sratsimir, Bulgaria, an IF1.5 tornado struck parts of Dereköy, Turkey, and an IF1 tornado struck parts of La Pouëze, France.

November 20–21
In one of the first events of the secondary severe weather season in the southeastern United States, several tornadoes occurred in Louisiana and Mississippi. Almost all occurred during the afternoon and evening of November 20, associated with the passage of a storm system through the region. Long-track EF1 tornadoes affected the Marksville and Cottonport areas in Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana, where multiple homes were damaged. The next day, a supercell produced a lone EF1 tornado in Geneva County, Alabama, west of Dothan, and a brief EF0 tornado occurred in Chester County, South Carolina.

November 25 (Greece)
A tornado was observed in Phalasarna. Significant damage occurred to greenhouses and trees, earning a rating of IF2.

December
There have been eight tornadoes confirmed in the United States in December.

December 9–10
A tornado outbreak and severe weather event ensued across portions of the Southern United States on December 9. A tornado impacted portions of Weakley County, Tennessee, including in Sharon and Dresden and causing several injuries, before impacting parts of Rutherford and across Gibson County, Tennessee, causing significant damage. An EF3 tornado struck Clarksville, Tennessee, among other surrounding areas in Tennessee and Kentucky. Multiple injuries were reported, along with at least 20,000 people being left without power. A large, intense tornado hit northern Nashville and surrounding areas, including Hendersonville, Tennessee, where heavy damage occurred, and prompting a tornado emergency to be issued for Hendersonville and Gallatin, Tennessee. The tornadoes killed at least six people in Tennessee, including three each in Clarksville and Madison, and also caused 62 injuries in Montgomery County, Tennessee, where the Clarksville tornado occurred, and several reported injuries in Hendersonville. More tornado debris signatures occurred on the next day, including an EF1 tornado in Wake County, North Carolina, west of Garner.

December 10 (Republic of Ireland)
A significant tornado touched down in Leitrim, County Leitrim, in the Republic of Ireland. The tornado, which was filmed from multiple angles, minorly injured two people. The European Severe Storms Laboratory rated the tornado IF2 due to building roof damage.

See also

Weather of 2023
Tornado
Tornadoes by year
Tornado records
Tornado climatology
Tornado myths
List of tornado outbreaks
List of F5 and EF5 tornadoes
List of F4 and EF4 tornadoes
List of F4 and EF4 tornadoes (2020–present)
List of North American tornadoes and tornado outbreaks
List of 21st-century Canadian tornadoes and tornado outbreaks
List of European tornadoes and tornado outbreaks
List of tornadoes and tornado outbreaks in Asia
List of Southern Hemisphere tornadoes and tornado outbreaks
List of tornadoes striking downtown areas of large cities
List of tornadoes with confirmed satellite tornadoes
Tornado intensity
Fujita scale
Enhanced Fujita scale
International Fujita scale
List of tornadoes rated on the International Fujita scale
TORRO scale


== References ==
